A project to implement a bead pull measurement of the field profile inside a microwave resonator, as set out in Battaglia et al. 1970 Nuovo Cimento B LXIX pages 121–150. A dielectric bead with sub-wavelength diameter is pulled through the resonator, shifting the resonance frequency by an amount proportional to the field intensity.

This was done in my experiment with 14 GHz microwaves in a 35 cm long spherical Fabry-Perot cavity fed by a rectangular waveguide through a small hole in one mirror. The dielectric bead was 1.5 mm in diameter and had a 0.4 mm diameter hole drilled in the centre. It was superglued onto thin fishing line and pulled through the cavity using a stepper motor.

My first attempt (using steps.py) at the measurement involved scanning across the resonance with a Vector Network Analyser for each step of the bead. However, with averaging, this took a long time and some drifts due to changing air temperature gave unpredictable results. The stepper motor was controlled with a stepper driver through a Raspberry Pi, data was taken on the Anritsu 37247C VNA using the AnritsuVNA library in written in ColdMatter/EDMSuite and implemented in Mathematica, and communication between the main computer and Raspberry Pi was done using an Arduino and the Mathematica SerioIO library (http://library.wolfram.com/infocenter/Demos/5726/) by Rob Raguet-Schofield.

For my second attempt, I locked the microwave source onto the resonance using a PI lock (feedback loop with proportional and integral gain). The control voltage (the feedback voltage keeping the source locked) is directly proportional to the resonance frequency, so was read out and saved on a scope to get the change in resonance frequency. This was much simpler, as all that was required was the Raspberry Pi to control the stepper driver. The scope was triggered from a GPIO pin on the Raspberry Pi.
